Liquidity page (#790)
BitcoinDesign/Guide: guide/how-it-works/liquidity.md

---
layout: guide
title: Liquidity
description: A primer on lightning network liquidity
nav_order: 3
parent: How it works
permalink: /guide/how-it-works/liquidity/
main_classes: -no-top-padding
image: https://bitcoin.design/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/liquidity/liquidity-preview.jpg
---

{% include picture.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/liquidity/liquidity-title.jpg"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/liquidity/liquidity-title@2x.jpg"
   mobile = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/liquidity/liquidity-title-mobile.jpg"
   mobileRetina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/liquidity/liquidity-title-mobile@2x.jpg"
   alt-text = "Photo of an ocean with the word 'Liquidity'"
   width = 1600
   height = 700
   layout = "full-width"
%}

<!--

Editor's notes

Figma file: https://www.figma.com/file/ZwRT4mZZ4UNGtsfLz22m8M/Liquidity?node-id=0%3A1

-->

> # Liquidity

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Lightning liquidity
```
Just a bit more clear when you land on the page (probably also better for SEO).

## What is liquidity?

Put simply, liquidity on the lightning network is the ability to send or receive bitcoin. In the context of an individual user, liquidity is a measurement of their wallet's ability to send and receive bitcoin over lightning.

### Inbound vs Outbound Liquidity

*Inbound liquidity* is the amount of bitcoin that the user is able to receive over a lightning channel. *Outbound liquidity* is the amount of bitcoin that the user is able to send over a lightning channel.

Receiving bitcoin decreases the user's inbound liquidity and increases their outbound liquidity. On the other hand, sending bitcoin decreases their outbound liquidity and increases their inbound liquidity.

{% include picture.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/liquidity/liquidity-inbound-outbound.png"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/liquidity/liquidity-inbound-outbound@2x.png"
   mobile = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/liquidity/liquidity-inbound-outbound-mobile.png"
   mobileRetina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/liquidity/liquidity-inbound-outbound-mobile@2x.png"

>    alt-text = "Graphic depicting inbound liquidity flowing towards a lightning node and outbound liquidity flowing away from a lightning node"

Reviewer 2: As the concept of a node hasn't been introduced by this stage of the page, I would change the title under the graphic from 'Lightning node' to 'Lighting user.'

Author: I don't follow. We use the term "lightning node" 34 times in the Guide across 15 separate pages (not including what's baked into images). On all but 2 of the pages, we never "introduce" the concept of a lightning node, we simply use the term lightning node.

If this is problematic, perhaps we could link to one of the pages that goes into more detail about a lightning node, such as [Software](https://bitcoin.design/guide/getting-started/software/#nodes), [Hardware](https://bitcoin.design/guide/getting-started/hardware/), or [Tech Primer](https://bitcoin.design/guide/getting-started/technology-primer/#the-lightning-payment-network), or even add a glossary entry for the term "lightning node".

Regardless, if this is an actually an issue, it's an issue on 13 other pages and not just this one.

Reviewer 2: I'm about to open a PR adding lighting content to the `Glossary` -> `Node` page, could add a link to that from this page, as well as others. 

I do think the term node just coming up can confuse people not familiar with the concept, so we should address that in other pages (most likely just linking to the node page when its merged).

   width = 800
   height = 348
%}

{% include tip/open.html color="blue" icon="info" label="Sending and receiving" %}

If your app offers the user visibility into the channel management process, you might consider using the term "receive limit" in place of "inbound liquidity" and "send limit" in place of "outbound liquidity".

{% include tip/close.html %}

## Why is liquidity important?

Liquidity directly impacts the user experience. If a user has no outbound liquidity, they can not send bitcoin over lightning. Conversely, if a user has no inbound liquidity, they can not receive bitcoin over lightning.

> Sourcing inbound liquidity is very important for onboarding a user to a lightning wallet. Imagine if you were brand new to bitcoin. You download your first wallet, a lightning wallet. Because there is no inbound liquidity, you can not receive any bitcoin. Would you understand what to do next? Would the wallet still seem useful to you?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sourcing inbound liquidity is very important for [funding]({{'/guide/daily-spending-wallet/funding/' | relative_url}}) and onboarding a user to a lightning wallet. Imagine if you were brand new to bitcoin. You download your first wallet, a lightning wallet. Because there is no inbound liquidity, you can not receive any bitcoin. Would you understand what to do next? Would the wallet still seem useful to you?
```

> Helping the user to find inbound liquidity will remove friction from onboarding and make their overall experience with bitcoin easier.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Helping the user to find inbound liquidity, or providing it as part of your bitcoin application, will remove friction from onboarding and make their overall experience with bitcoin easier.
```

## Identifying different use cases

> Before going further, it's important to make a distinction between different use cases for lightning nodes. It is difficult to make firm categories for lightning nodes. However, we can categorize them very generally for our purposes within the Design Guide. Here are some very broad examples of different use cases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before going further, it's important to make a distinction between different use cases for lightning users. It is difficult to make firm categories for lightning user types. However, we can categorize them very generally for our purposes within the Design Guide. Here are some very broad examples of different use cases.
```
The concept of a node hasn't been explained by this point, maybe we need a small section before this explaining that a user is a node (if they are non-custodially using lightning, which they should be) and that these users interact with, and subsequently deal with liquidity differently based on their use case. 

Once we have some content in `Glossay` -> `Node` page (currently working on it) on lightning nodes we can link to that from this section for a deeper dive.

Reviewer: For practical reasons, I'd keep this as is and add those links to the nodes page when that page is ready.

                  retina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/liquidity/node-rachel@2x.png"
                  alt-text = "Depiction of Rachel and a dedicated hardware lightning node"
                  width = 236
                  height = 236
               %}
               Routing Node Operator
            </th>
            <th>
               {% include picture.html
                  image = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/liquidity/node-miguel.png"
                  retina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/liquidity/node-miguel@2x.png"
                  alt-text = "Depiction of Miguel and a cloud lightning node"
                  width = 236
                  height = 236
               %}
               Merchant
            </th>
            <th>
               {% include picture.html
                  image = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/liquidity/node-wagner.png"
                  retina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/liquidity/node-wagner@2x.png"
                  alt-text = "Depiction of Wagner and a mobile phone lightning node"
                  width = 236
                  height = 236
               %}

>                Wallet User

Reviewer 2: Merchants and routing node operators also use wallets, I'd simply call this 'Payments' and change the 'What is their incentive?' to "Wagner uses a mobile bitcoin wallet that supports lightning to send and receive payments.

Could also link to the DSP reference design as that section encompasses this use case.

Author: Agreed with changing the description to "Wagner uses...". Disagree with changing the name to "Payments".

Author: Updated in fbcd880

            </th>
         </tr>
      </thead>
      <tbody>
         <tr>
            <td>What is their incentive?</td>

>             <td>Rachel operates a lightning node so she can earn routing fees for providing liquidity to the network</td>

Reviewer 2: Leasing inbound liqudity (and offering zero routing fees) has come a pretty common (and more economical) way for routing node operators to make a profit.

Author: Updated in b720ff6

            <td>Miguel operates a lightning node so he can receive payments at his business</td>
            <td>Wagner has a mobile bitcoin wallet that supports lightning</td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>What's their role in the lightning network?</td>
            <td>Rachel acts more like a hub for routing other's lightning payments, and is rarely the origin or endpoint</td>
            <td>Miguel is usually the endpoint for lightning payments</td>
            <td>Wagner is sometimes the origin and sometimes the endpoint for lightning payments</td>
         </tr>
         <tr>

>             <td>Where does it run?</td>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            <td>Where does the node run?</td>
```

            <td>Runs on dedicated hardware, like a Raspberry Pi or rack-mounted server</td>
            <td>Runs on a cloud service provider</td>
            <td>Runs on Wagner's phone</td>
         </tr>
         <tr>

>             <td>When is it online?</td>
>             <td>Always online</td>
>             <td>Always online</td>
>             <td>Only online when Wagner opens the app</td>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            <td>When is the node online?</td>
            <td>Always</td>
            <td>Always</td>
            <td>Only when Wagner opens his mobile wallet</td>
```

         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>How many lightning channels?</td>

>             <td>Many lightning channels</td>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            <td>Many</td>
```
Remove the term `lightning channels` from all rows (except for the question) for brevity?

Author: Done

            <td>Several lightning channels</td>
            <td>Few lightning channels</td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>How much liquidity?</td>

>             <td>Massive liquidity</td>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            <td>Massive</td>
```
Remove the term `liquidity` from all rows (except for the question) for brevity?

Author: Done

            <td>Medium liquidity</td>
            <td>Less liquidity</td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>Where does the liquidity come from?</td>

>             <td>Liquidity is self-funded</td>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            <td>Self-funded</td>
```
Remove the term `Liquidity is` from all rows (except for the question) for brevity?

Author: Done

            <td>Liquidity is usually sourced externally (from an LSP, for example)</td>
            <td>Liquidity is usually sourced externally (from an LSP, for example)</td>
         </tr>

>          <tr>

Reviewer 2: Could add another section called "Where does the liquidity reside?"

Routing node = balanced inbound / outbound
Merchant = Mostly inbound
Payments = Mostly outbound

Author: I disagree with referring to a mobile wallet user as "payments". I know you linked to that other website on Slack which uses the term "Payments" to describe a class of node, but I reject their categorization.

Consider the mobile wallet user: we might call this an example of a daily spending wallet. If the user is spending from the wallet, then they must have bitcoin in the wallet. In order to get bitcoin in the wallet, they had to have inbound liquidity at one point to receive the bitcoin. Furthermore, if bitcoin is so tightly integrated into their lives that they are spending bitcoin from the wallet daily, this means they must be receiving some amount of income in bitcoin (or at the very least, receiving it over lightning). So receiving income on a regular basis would require inbound liquidity.

Now to play devils' advocate against my own position here, sure, maybe this could be accomplished without inbound liquidity per se. Perhaps there is some kind of swapping service setup so they can receive their income on-chain and then have that automatically cycled into lightning channels with outbound liquidity. I admit, that's one way in which it could be done. But we're making assumptions there about how this technology could progress, and I can just as easily envision a scenario where their wallet purchases inbound channels from an LSP service so their wallet can receive income payments on a regular basis.

Consider a wallet like Breez. I tell somebody that if they download the wallet, I'll send them $1 worth of bitcoin. They download it, I send them $1 worth of bitcoin, and Breez automatically opens a channel for them. Does Breez open a channel that's only worth $1? I'm fairly confident they open a much larger channel expecting the user to continue receiving bitcoin payments over time. So in this very common scenario which already happens presently, we have a situation where the user has much more inbound liquidity than outbound.

How can I be convinced that a mobile wallet is simply a "payments" wallet which mostly has outbound liquidity?

Reviewer 2: It was spending on the site I linked which I do not like also, payments more aligns with our DSW reference design and it's easy to make that link to that section intuitively calling it payments. Maybe call it Daily Spending Wallet as a nod to that reference design (as that is what it is). Wallet user just sounds a little abstract - merchants and routing nodes also both use wallets in their use case.

Just trying to put myself in the shoes of a complete noob reading this page!

> How can I be convinced that a mobile wallet is simply a "payments" wallet which mostly has outbound liquidity?

Payments implies receiving and spending, not just spending 

Agree with your points though, I'll take back my suggestion of having another section called 'Where does the liquidity reside' but still think wallet user should be called something else

Author: Ok, I forgot that website called it "Spending". Fair point, payments can be either way.

Yeah, let me think about the naming thing. My main issue is with characterizing this type of user as only needing liquidity in one direction.

Author: So I've been thinking about. Sure, "payments" seems in part like a reasonable way to describe a mobile wallet. You sue the mobile wallet to send and receive payments. I'm just trying to square this with the other terminology on the page. Originally, I was describing "nodes". Then we all agreed we shouldn't describe nodes and should instead describe users.

So what does that leave us with?

- Routing node operator
- Merchant
- ~~Wallet user~~
  - Payments?
  - Payments user?

Something about just calling the user "payments" seems weird.

It doesn't really bother me to call them a "wallet user". Sure, the routing node operator and the merchant can run a their own full nodes _and_ also be wallet users as well. Depends on the context, are we talking about how they run their business or how they pay for their groceries?

            <td>How much do they know about lightning?</td>
            <td>Rachel is a lightning node operator and is very cognizant of every decision she makes with her node</td>
            <td>Miguel knows enough about operating a node to make his business function</td>
            <td>Wagner is not even aware that his phone has a lightning node on it</td>
         </tr>
      </tbody>
   </table>
</div>

> Currently, most of the thinking in the Design Guide is focused on mobile wallet users such as Wagner. However, it is helpful to understand that routing nodes play a very important role in getting user funds across the lightning network.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Currently, most of the thinking in the Design Guide is focused on [mobile wallet]({{'/guide/daily-spending-wallet/' | relative_url}}) users such as Wagner. However, it is helpful to understand that routing nodes play a very important role in getting user funds across the lightning network.
```

## Liquidity examples

The following examples are designed to help you understand how liquidity works on the lightning network.

> Lori and Lamar, two routing node operators, open a channel together. Lori initiates the channel opening with 1,000,000 sats. This is the amount she makes available for transactions in the channel. Her initial outbound liquidity is the full amount of 1,000,000 sats, and her initial inbound liquidity is 0 sats (since Lamar has not committed any sats to the channel).

Reviewer 2: A point that is missing is that Lamar can send free payments directly to Lamar with this, on first read it sounded like channels are 'only' for routing but they are also useful for P2P payments.

Author: Payment channels _can_ be used for P2P payments, but I purposefully excluded them from this page. I think that P2P payments are an edge-case. I do not think they constitute not the majority of payments on LN.

Take the following example:

> Alice likes coffee. Bob has a coffeeshop. Alice frequents Bob's coffeeshop, she opens a payment channel between her lightning node and Bob's lightning node. Since she stops in the coffeeshop everyday, she is able to route a payment directly to Bob for zero fees. After a month of buying coffees, Alice rebalances the channel or opens a new channel with Bob.

Sure, Alice _can_ do all of that. But I don't find it likely that the 99% of users are going to do this. And every time I try and give an example like that to a designer to help them understand lightning liquidity, they become too distracted with the story about the coffee shop to realize that I am just trying to paint a simplified picture of how a payment channel works. Thus, I want to separate out the activity of mobile nodes and routing nodes.

Maybe a better use case for P2P payments is something like:

> BobCorp is the preferred widget vendor for AliceCorp. The AliceCorp accounting department realizes that they are spending a lot on routing fees paying BobCorp invoices. So, after some well placed slack messages, they are able to collaborate with their IT department and the BobCorp IT department to open a direct payment channel to BobCorp. Now, they can pay invoices all the time with zero routing fees.

But I just think that kind of situation is not a huge part of what we're designing for at the moment.

So in this page, I'm specifically excluding any mention of P2P because I think it's so incredibly rare and is not what a designer needs to understand to design good lightning wallets.

> Lori and Lamar, two routing node operators, open a channel together. Lori initiates the channel opening with 1,000,000 sats. This is the amount she makes available for transactions in the channel. Her initial outbound liquidity is the full amount of 1,000,000 sats, and her initial inbound liquidity is 0 sats (since Lamar has not committed any sats to the channel).

Reviewer 2: Would be good to mention that channels are usually funded by one party. I made a comment lower on in the page about adding content on cooperative channel opens (previously dual funded channels)

Author: Added "further reading" tip box

{% include picture.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/liquidity/liquidity-05.png"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/liquidity/liquidity-05@2x.png"
   mobile = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/liquidity/liquidity-05-mobile.png"
   mobileRetina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/liquidity/liquidity-05-mobile@2x.png"
   alt-text = "Lindsay opens a 2,000,000 satoshi channel with Lori"
   width = 800
   height = 800
%}

Lori, Lamar, and Lindsay can open channels with as many other nodes as they like -- the only limitation is how much bitcoin they are willing to put into lightning channels. This interconnected web of channels is effectively “the lightning network”.

{% include picture.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/liquidity/liquidity-06.png"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/liquidity/liquidity-06@2x.png"
   mobile = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/liquidity/liquidity-06-mobile.png"
   mobileRetina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/liquidity/liquidity-06-mobile@2x.png"
   alt-text = "Lori, Lamar, Lindsay, and the lightning network"
   width = 1200
   height = 800
   layout = "full-width"
%}

> Getting liquidity is not a one time issue on the lightning network. Routing nodes are constantly rebalancing their channels so that they have the right amount of liquidity in the right places.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Getting liquidity is not a one time issue on the lightning network. Routing nodes are constantly rebalancing their channels so that they have the right amount of liquidity in the right places. They do this by essentially sending themselves payments through the lightning network. 
```

{% include picture.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/liquidity/liquidity-07.png"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/liquidity/liquidity-07@2x.png"
   mobile = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/liquidity/liquidity-07-mobile.png"
   mobileRetina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/liquidity/liquidity-07-mobile@2x.png"
   alt-text = "Rebalancing channels on the lightning network"
   width = 1200
   height = 800
   layout = "full-width"
%}

> While the example thus far has focused on routing nodes, mobile nodes also fit into this scenario. Now that our node operator Lori has maintained a well-connected routing node, she can use her node to extend liquidity to mobile nodes.

Reviewer 2: May want to say mobile and merchants and include a merchant or two in the image.

Author: Added to image

### Inbound liquidity

Helping the user get inbound liquidity is probably more important than outbound liquidity for most use cases. Without inbound liquidity, the user can not receive bitcoin over lightning. This makes it very difficult for a new bitcoin user to receive their first bitcoin.

If the user does not have bitcoin in their wallet, they do not need outbound liquidity. On the other hand, if the user has inbound liquidity, then they are free to receive bitcoin, and then end up with outbound liquidity from the bitcoin they received.

One way to help your users receive inbound liquidity is through LSPs (Lightning Service Providers). You could run your own LSP service or integrate your product with an existing LSP.

[Read the LSP section]({{'/guide/how-it-works/lightning-service-providers/#inbound-liquidity' | relative_url}}) to learn more. [Breez](https://breez.technology/) is an example of a wallet that does this.

> ### Outbound liquidity

Reviewer 2: Mentioned above, but you may want to state that channel opens usually only give the initiating party liquidity (that being outbound for them). 

You should add something in this bottom section on cooperative channel opens and how they can be used to open a channel with both parties having liquidity. 

Another thing you could mention as a TBC is channel splicing and how liquidity can be adjusted without channel opens / closes.

Author: Personally, I'd love to talk about dual-funded channels. But I'm writing this page for a designer audience and I'm trying to take a very complicated topic and distill it down into the minimum amount of information they need to understand lightning. I don't want to mention every single aspect of lightning technology, especially parts that aren't widely adopted yet. It's meant to be a general overview.

Reviewer 2: Yeah I don't think we need to go in-depth but I don't see the harm in mentioning it's existence and maybe linking to external source if they want to go more in-depth

Reviewer: Maybe some of those extras could be listed at the bottom of the page under "further reading" or "dive deeper"? That way they don't interrupt the flow.

Author: Added "further reading" tip box on dual funded channels and channel splicing immediately after the liquidity diagram section.

There may be some situations where you need to help your user with outbound liquidity. An example of this would be a user who already owns bitcoin and wants to spend it using their lightning wallet.

> #### Automatic Channel Opens

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### On-demand Channel Opens
```

This is the term used in the funding page, should mention why they are on-demand (opened when needed).

Author: I'm confused. When I read the [Funding page](https://deploy-preview-790--sad-borg-390916.netlify.app/guide/daily-spending-wallet/funding/#funding-the-wallet), it describes a funding flow wherein the user sends on-chain funds to their wallet to create a channel. Then the tip box about "On-demand Channels" says:

> Offering a on-demand channels Lightning service allows users to fund their wallet with a Lightning payment.

So the Funding page makes it seem like On-demand channels are something distinctly different, where the funding happens from a lightning payment and not an on-chain transaction.

I'm specifically talking about funding with an on-chain transaction and simply having the noff software on the phone automatically use those funds to initiate a channel open with another node. I feel like we are describing different things here.

Reviewer 2: I need to re-work that page, but yeah on-demand channels allows users to fund their lightning wallet from another lighting wallet (or from an exchange) without it they have to send on-chain and conduct a swap / open a direct channel.

I made a mistake here, I referred to this type of open you are talking about as an [instant open](/guide/daily-spending-wallet/funding/#instant-open) not an on-demand channel open*

One way to accomplish this could be through an automatic channel open. If the user has bitcoin in an on-chain wallet, you could have them send bitcoin on-chain to the wallet, and then automatically use those funds to open a lightning channel with a well-connected node. An example of a wallet that does this is [Blixt](https://blixtwallet.github.io/).

> #### LSP Swap-In

Reviewer 2: You can also use a Swap-out to get inbound liquidity.

Author: Yeah, so I absolutely agree that swap-out can be used for inbound liquidity. My only reservation is that I feel like it's for a different situation. My intention with this part of the page was to talk about situations where a wallet handles liquidity for the user automatically. Swap-out seems like a different situation -- as a user, my goal is to move my funds on-chain, perhaps for cold storage. That's my primary goal, but another result is that I end up with inbound liquidity after the swap-out.

In a situation where a wallet is helping the user out and managing the liquidity for them, I feel like it would be a little weird for the wallet to just initiate a swap-out and move those funs on-chain.

So yeah, agreed, I just feel like swap-outs are better for different situations.

Reviewer 2: Good points, just thought I'd bring this up but makes sense that this section focuses on wallets handling liquidity
